ms.md, before:

Metric spaces are an abstract characterization of spaces equipped with a notion of distance. To each pair of elements we assign a number, the *distance*, between the two points. We must employ the real numbers to quantify distance since the hypotenuse of a unit square is irrational, and it would be silly to lay out a theory of distance that could not account for the euclidean plane. We also only make use of the nonnegative reals, since it's not clear how to interpret *negative* distance (how, exactly, would -5 distance differ from +5 distance?).

Let $X$ be a set, and let $X_k$ for $k \leq |X|$ be the set of all subsets of $X$ with cardinality $k$. For example, $X_1$ is the collection of all singletons, and $X_0$ is a set consisting of the empty set.

A **metric space** is a pair $(X, d)$ where $d$ is a function $X_1 \cup X_2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ such that:

  - For all $A \in X_1 \cup X_2$, $d(A) \geq 0$
  - $d(A) = 0$ iff $A$ is a singleton
  - For $A = \{x,y\}$, $B = \{y,z\}$, $C = \{x,z\}$ in $X_2$, $d(C) \leq d(A) + d(B)$ 

The first two just say that distances are nonnegative and distinct points have nonzero distance. Probably the most important property is the third, commonly known as the *triangle inequality*. It says, simply, that there's no way to shorten a trip from point A to point B by visiting some other point C on the way.

The most common formulation of metric spaces (and definitely easier to work with) is this: *d* is a function $X \times X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ such that:

  - $d(x,y) \geq 0$ for all $x$, $y$, and $d(x,y) = 0$ iff $x = y$.
  - $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$
  - $d(x,z) \leq d(x,y) + d(y,z)$

An **open ball** of radius r around x is the set of all points in the metric space that are less than a distance r from x. In symbols:

  $$ B_r(x_0) = \{ x : d(x, x_0) < r \}$$

We will often call an open ball of radius $r$ an **$r$-ball**.

An **open set** is a set $U$ such that every $x \in U$ has an open ball $B_\epsilon(x)$ which is entirely contained in $U$.

Open balls are a kind of "primitive" open set that all other open sets are defined in terms of. We haven't yet proved that open balls are open sets, however. So let's do that.

**Lemma:** Open balls are open.

*Proof:* Let $B_\epsilon(x)$ be any open ball. Then $y$ is some distance $\delta \in \mathbb{R}$ from $x$ where $\delta < \epsilon$ (by definition of an open ball). We need to find some $\xi$-ball around $y$ that fits inside $B_\epsilon(x)$. 

Restating this condition using the definition of open balls, we need to find some $\xi \in \mathbb{R}$ such that every $z \in B_\xi(y)$ is less than $\epsilon$ from x. So we need to ensure that $d(x, z) < \epsilon$.

By the triangle inequality, $d(x, z) \leq d(x, y) + d(y, z)$. By hypothesis, $d(x,y) = \delta$, so if we could ensure that $d(y, z) < \epsilon - \delta$, we would be okay.

That's our $\xi$, then. Set $\xi = \epsilon - \delta$. Every point in the $\xi$-ball will then be in our $\epsilon$-ball.

We can restate the above proof with more words: after traveling from $x$ to $y$, we used up some $\delta$ of distance. If we go $\epsilon - \delta$ more distance from $y$, it is possible that we will get outside of the $\epsilon$-ball. So set $\epsilon - \delta$ as the radius we must stay strictly inside. This is an open ball around $y$ that is contained in the $\epsilon$-ball around $x$. $\Box$


An **open neighborhood** of $x$ is an open set that contains $x$. A **neighborhood** of $x$ is a set that contains an open neighborhood of $x$.

We will use $\mathcal{N}_x$ to notate the set of all neighborhoods of a point $x$, and $\mathcal{O}_x$ to notate the set of all open neighborhoods of $x$.

Above we used open neighborhoods to define neighborhoods. We could have gone in the reverse direction as well:

**Lemma**: In metric space $(X, d)$, a set $U \subseteq X$ is open iff for every $y \in U$, $U \in \mathcal{N}_y$

*Proof:* If $U$ is open, then it clearly holds because open balls are open sets. Conversely, if $U$ is a neighborhood of every one of its elements, then every $y \in U$ has an open set $O_y$ contained in $U$, and that $O_y$ contains an open ball of $y$. $\Box$

Commit message:

add proof of the topology lemma for open sets

ms.md, after:

Metric spaces are an abstract characterization of spaces equipped with a notion of distance. To each pair of elements we assign a number, the *distance*, between the two points. We must employ the real numbers to quantify distance since the hypotenuse of a unit square is irrational, and it would be silly to lay out a theory of distance that could not account for the euclidean plane. We also only make use of the nonnegative reals, since it's not clear how to interpret *negative* distance (how, exactly, would -5 distance differ from +5 distance?).

Let $X$ be a set, and let $X_k$ for $k \leq |X|$ be the set of all subsets of $X$ with cardinality $k$. For example, $X_1$ is the collection of all singletons, and $X_0$ is a set consisting of the empty set.

A **metric space** is a pair $(X, d)$ where $d$ is a function $X_1 \cup X_2 \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ such that:

  - For all $A \in X_1 \cup X_2$, $d(A) \geq 0$
  - $d(A) = 0$ iff $A$ is a singleton
  - For $A = \{x,y\}$, $B = \{y,z\}$, $C = \{x,z\}$ in $X_2$, $d(C) \leq d(A) + d(B)$ 

The first two just say that distances are nonnegative and distinct points have nonzero distance. Probably the most important property is the third, commonly known as the *triangle inequality*. It says, simply, that there's no way to shorten a trip from point A to point B by visiting some other point C on the way.

The most common formulation of metric spaces (and definitely easier to work with) is this: *d* is a function $X \times X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ such that:

  - $d(x,y) \geq 0$ for all $x$, $y$, and $d(x,y) = 0$ iff $x = y$.
  - $d(x,y) = d(y,x)$
  - $d(x,z) \leq d(x,y) + d(y,z)$

An **open ball** of radius r around x is the set of all points in the metric space that are less than a distance r from x. In symbols:

  $$ B_r(x_0) = \{ x : d(x, x_0) < r \}$$

We will often call an open ball of radius $r$ an **$r$-ball**.

An **open set** is a set $U$ such that every $x \in U$ has an open ball $B_\epsilon(x)$ which is entirely contained in $U$.

Open balls are a kind of "primitive" open set that all other open sets are defined in terms of. We haven't yet proved that open balls are open sets, however. So let's do that.

**Lemma:** Open balls are open.

*Proof:* Let $B_\epsilon(x)$ be any open ball. Then $y$ is some distance $\delta \in \mathbb{R}$ from $x$ where $\delta < \epsilon$ (by definition of an open ball). We need to find some $\xi$-ball around $y$ that fits inside $B_\epsilon(x)$. 

Restating this condition using the definition of open balls, we need to find some $\xi \in \mathbb{R}$ such that every $z \in B_\xi(y)$ is less than $\epsilon$ from x. So we need to ensure that $d(x, z) < \epsilon$.

By the triangle inequality, $d(x, z) \leq d(x, y) + d(y, z)$. By hypothesis, $d(x,y) = \delta$, so if we could ensure that $d(y, z) < \epsilon - \delta$, we would be okay.

That's our $\xi$, then. Set $\xi = \epsilon - \delta$. Every point in the $\xi$-ball will then be in our $\epsilon$-ball.

We can restate the above proof with more words: after traveling from $x$ to $y$, we used up some $\delta$ of distance. If we go $\epsilon - \delta$ more distance from $y$, it is possible that we will get outside of the $\epsilon$-ball. So set $\epsilon - \delta$ as the radius we must stay strictly inside. This is an open ball around $y$ that is contained in the $\epsilon$-ball around $x$. $\Box$

The following lemma is fundamentally important.

**Topology Lemma for Open Sets:** In a metric space $(X, d)$:

 1. $\emptyset$, $X$ are both open.
 2. If $\mathcal{S}$ is an arbitrary collection of open sets in $X$, then $\bigcup \mathcal{S}$ is open
 3. If $U_1$ and $U_2$ are open subsets of $X$, then $X_1 \cap X_2$ is open.

Proof: 

(1) $\emptyset$ is vacuously open. $X$ is open because it contains *every* open ball, so it certainly contains *an* open for every point.

(2) If $x \in \bigcup \mathcal{S}$, then it must be in some open $U \in \mathcal{S}$. So  $\exists B_\epsilon(x) \subseteq U \subseteq \bigcup \mathcal{S}$. The arbitrary union of open sets is thus open.

(3) If $x \in U_1 \cap U_2$, there are open balls $B_\epsilon(x)$, $B_\delta(x)$ contained in $U_1$ and $U_2$, resp. The smaller of these balls is contained in both open sets, so is also in the intersection. $\Box$


An **open neighborhood** of $x$ is an open set that contains $x$. A **neighborhood** of $x$ is a set that contains an open neighborhood of $x$.

We will use $\mathcal{N}_x$ to notate the set of all neighborhoods of a point $x$, and $\mathcal{O}_x$ to notate the set of all open neighborhoods of $x$.

Above we used open neighborhoods to define neighborhoods. We could have gone in the reverse direction as well:

**Lemma**: In metric space $(X, d)$, a set $U \subseteq X$ is open iff for every $y \in U$, $U \in \mathcal{N}_y$

*Proof:* If $U$ is open, then it clearly holds because open balls are open sets. Conversely, if $U$ is a neighborhood of every one of its elements, then every $y \in U$ has an open set $O_y$ contained in $U$, and that $O_y$ contains an open ball of $y$. $\Box$
